---
title: IoC in R
date: 2018-11-27T22:00:00Z
layout: post
path: "/iocinr/"
tags:
  - R
---

Say you have a large analytics suite. And then you say you don't want to use R6
classes because reasons<sup>[1](#iocinr1)</sup>. Say the functions contained within that analytics suite have to be kept around for posterity- you need versions of your functions, you want to default to using the latest versions, but need the older ones to stick around.

Yes, this can turn ugly fast, and organizing where they live would probably be a pain.

Here's an S3 example. Imagine that `f1` and `f2` are both versions of some kind of summarizing function `f`, with `f1` and `f2` being version 1 and 2 respectively<sup>[2](#iocinr2)</sup>.

```r
f1 <- function(x) UseMethod("f1")
f1.numeric <- function(x) mean(x)
f2 <- function(x) UseMethod("f2")
f2.numeric <- function(x) median(x)
z <- c(1,2,5)

f1(z)
#2.666667
f2(z)
#2
```

In a language that isn't R, you might use a factory pattern to make this happen. Here we're going to do something closer to a decorator, a function that returns a function.

```r
getFunctionByName <- function(fname) {
    if (missing(fname)) return(f2)
    functions <- list(f1 = f1, f2 = f2)
    functions[[fname]]
}
f <- getFunctionByName("f1")
f(z)
#2.666667
f <- getFunctionByName()
f(z)
#2
```

This will default to using `f2`, unless you call f1 by name. Yeah okay, you're not that impressed. It's half a step better than just using `match.fun` because `match.fun` doesn't let you put in a blank value. A whole step better might be:

```r
getFunctionByVersion <- function(vers) {
    functions <- list("1" = f1, "2" = f2)
    if (missing(vers)) {
        versions <- names(functions)
        maxVersion <- max(versions)
        return(functions[[maxVersion]])
    }
    functions[[as.character(vers)]]
}
f <- getFunctionByName("1")
f(z)
#2.666667
f <- getFunctionByName()
f(z)
#2
```

That's a bit better - now we're using an *attribute* of the function, instead of the function itself. This is helpful, because we'd want to code up our analyses with `f` and a version number if we needed it.

But wait, there's more. One thing I don't like about this is that you have to define *what functions you're looking at* within this function, as well as how to find them. Not really inversion of control, just moving it somewhere else. Now I said "attribute" in the previous sentence, that should give some kind of indication of where this is going:

```r
f1 <- function(x) UseMethod("f1")
f1.numeric <- function(x) mean(x)
attr(f1, "version") <- "1"

f2 <- function(x) UseMethod("f2")
f2.numeric <- function(x) median(x)
attr(f1, "version") <- "2"

getFunctionByVersion <- function(vers) {
    functions <- list(f1, f2)
    versions <- sapply(functions, attr, "version")
    if (missing(vers)) vers <- max(versions)
    whichFun <- versions[versions == vers]
    return(functions[[whichFun]])
}

f <- getFunctionByName("1")
f(z)
#2.666667
f <- getFunctionByName()
f(z)
#2
```

Why is this better? Well now, *how* you identify your functions, via a version number or whatever, now belongs to the function you're trying to get itself, NOT within the getter<sup>[3](#iocinr3)</sup>.

If you're unfamiliar with what an attribute is in R, don't feel bad, in my experience they don't get used much. There are a few special ones, like "class", and "dim" and "dimnames" for arrays/matrices/data.frames, that sort of thing.

## Bonus

Cool, so now I can get functions by their version. Those functions all live in code though, and get loaded into some environment. Can't we just do:

```r
getFunctionByVersion <- function(vers) {
    e <- .GlobalEnv
    functionsChar <- ls(e)[sapply(ls(e), function(x) {class(get(x))}) == "function"]
    functions <- lapply(functionsChar, get)

    versions <- sapply(functions, attr, "version")
    if (missing(vers)) vers <- max(versions)
    whichFun <- which(versions == vers)
    return(functions[[whichFun]])
}
```

Make certain you set the environment of where to look for the other functions, it probably won't be in the global environment.

Is this a good idea? Obviously not - more than likely you'll have multiple functions that have the same version. You could do one of two things.

1. Set your functions that have the same basic functionality (ie, the set of those you're trying to choose from) to live in different environments. At that point, you might as well be using R6 classes -- that's basically what they do.
2. Add more specificity:

```r
f1 <- function(x) UseMethod("f1")
f1.numeric <- function(x) mean(x)
attr(f1, "version") <- "1"
class(f1) <- c("SummaryFun", "function")

f2 <- function(x) UseMethod("f2")
f2.numeric <- function(x) median(x)
attr(f2, "version") <- "2"
class(f2) <- c("SummaryFun", "function")

getFunctionByVersion <- function(vers) UseMethod("getFunctionByVersion")
getFunctionByVersion.SummaryFun <- function(vers) {
    e <- .GlobalEnv
    functionsChar <- ls(e)[sapply(ls(e), function(x) {class(get(x))}) == "SummaryFun"]
    functions <- lapply(functionsChar, get)

    versions <- sapply(functions, attr, "version")
    if (missing(vers)) vers <- max(versions)
    whichFun <- which(versions == vers)
    return(functions[[whichFun]])
}
```

Classes in R are like any other attribute. Now, if you set the class attribute on these summary functions, they'll get picked up by class *and* attribute.

Is *this* a good idea? I'd say it depends. The major factor for me is how likely is it that you'll need something like this, and how likely it is that the classes and other attributes get lost in the shuffle. This example is simple, you'll need to determine if this type of coding pattern is for you and any of your projects.


<a name="iocinr1">1:</a> Hey I won't tell you how to organize your project. But in my view, R6 breaks a lot of what's beautiful about R; namely, that R is functional. If you *are* going to use R6 classes in a project, I strongly recommend writing the ENTIRE project using R6 classes. It makes it much more obvious what's going on. If you have a mix of R6 classes, functions, other stuff, much harder to tell.

<a name="iocinr2">2:</a> If you stretch your imagination just bit, imagine you had some kind of distribution, you were using the mean of it, but then realized your distribution was usually skewed and you thought that the median was a better metric of central tendency. Then, you wanted to make certain your original function still lived in your code-base, could be callable, just that you usually didn't want it to be. It could happen.

<a name="iocinr3">3:</a> I'd say "in", but attributes in R are weird "with" is close enough.
